---
template: post.jade
title: Beyond Good and Evil 207
---

However gratefully one may go to welcome an *objective* spirit &mdash; and who
has not been sick to death of everything subjective and its accursed
ipsissimosity! &mdash; in the end one has to learn to be cautious with one's
gratitude too and put a stop to the exaggerated way in which the
depersonalization of the spirit is today celebrated as redemption and
transfiguration, as if it were the end in itself: as is usually the case within
the pessimist school, which also has good reason to accord the highest honours
to 'disinterested knowledge'. The objective man who no longer scolds or curses
as the pessimist does, the *ideal* scholar in whom the scientific instinct,
after thousandfold total and partial failure, for once comes to full bloom, is
certainly one of the most precious instruments there are: but he belongs in the
hand of one who is mightier. He is only an instrument, let us say a *mirror*
&mdash; he is not an 'end in himself'.

And the objective man is in fact a mirror: accustomed to submitting to whatever
wants to be known, lacking any other pleasure than that provided by knowledge,
by 'mirroring' &mdash; he waits until something comes along and then gently
spreads himself out, so that not even the lightest footsteps and the fluttering
of ghostly being shall be lost on his surface and skin.  Whatever still remains
to him of his 'own person' seems to him accidental, often capricious, more often
disturbing: so completely has he become a passage and reflection of forms and
events not his own. He finds it an effort to think about 'himself', and not
infrequently he thinks about himself mistakenly; he can easily confused himself
with another, he fails to understand his own needs and is in this respect alone
unsubtle and negligent.

Perhaps he is troubled by his health or by the pettiness and stuffiness of his
wife and friends, or by a lack of companions and company &mdash; yes, he forces
himself to reflect on his troubles: but in vain! Already his thoughts are
roaming, off to a *more general* case, and tomorrow he will know as little how
to help himself as he did yesterday. He no longer knows how to take himself
seriously, nor does he have the time for it: he is cheerful, *not* because he
has no troubles but because he has no fingers and facility for dealing with *his
troubles*.

His habitual going out to welcome everything and every experience, the sunny and
ingenuous hospitality with which he accepts all he encounters, his inconsiderate
benevolence, his perilous unconcernedness over Yes and No: alas, how often he
has to suffer for these his virtues! &mdash; and as a human being in general he
can all too easily become the *caput mortuum* of these virtues.  If love and
hatred are demanded of him, I mean love and hatred as God, woman and animal
understand them &mdash;: he will do what he can and give what he can. But one
ought not to be surprised if it is not very much &mdash; if he proves spurious,
brittle, questionable and soft. His love and his hatred are artificial and more
of a *tour de force*, a piece of vanity and exaggeration. For he is genuine only
when he can be objective: only in his cheerful totalism can he remain 'nature'
and 'natural'.

His mirroring soul, for ever polishing itself, no longer knows how to affirm or
how to deny; he does not command, neither does he destroy. *'Je ne meprise
presque rien'* &mdash; he sais with Liebniz: one should not overlook or
underestimate the *presque*! Nor is he an exemplar; he neither leads nor
follows; he sets himself altogether too far off to have any reason to take sides
between good and evil.

When he was for so long confused with the *philosopher*, with the Caesarian
cultivator and *Gewaltmensch* of culture, he was done much too great honour and
what is essential in him was overlooked &mdash; he is an instrument, something
of a slave, if certainly the sublimest kind of slave, but in himself he is
nothing &mdash; *presque rien*!

The objective man is an instrument, a precious, easily damaged and tarnished
measuring instrument and reflecting apparatus which ought to be respected and
taken good care of; but he is not an end, a termination and ascent, a
complementary man in whom the *rest* of existence is justified, a conclusion
&mdash; and even less a beginning, a begetting and first cause, something solid,
powerful and based firmly on itself that wants to be master: but rather only a
delicate, empty, elegant, flexible mould which has first to wait for some
content so as 'to form' itself by it &mdash; as a rule a man without content, a
'selfless' man. Consequently nothing for women either, *in parenthesis*. &mdash;
